### 6.4 Perspective
---


&emsp;&emsp;Like most assemblers, the Hack assembler is a relatively simple program, dealing mainly with text processing. Naturally, assemblers for richer machine languages are more complex. Also, some assemblers feature more sophisticated symbol handling capabilities not found in Hack. For example, the assembler may allow programmers to explicitly associate symbols with particular data addresses, to perform “constant arithmetic” on symbols (e.g., to use table+5 to refer to the fifth memory location after the address referred to by table), and so on. Additionally, many assemblers are capable of handling macro commands. A macro command is simply a sequence of machine instructions that has a name. For example, our assembler can be extended to translate an agreed-upon macro-command, say D=M[xxx], into the two instructions@xxx followed immediately by D=M (xxx being an address). Clearly, such macro commands can considerably simplify the programming of commonly occurring operations, at a low translation cost.

&emsp;&emsp;We note in closing that stand-alone assemblers are rarely used in practice. First, assembly programs are rarely written by humans, but rather by compilers. And a compiler—being an automaton—does not have to bother to generate symbolic commands, since it may be more convenient to directly produce binary machine code. On the other hand, many high-level language compilers allow programmers to embed segments of assembly language code within high-level programs. This capability, which is rather common in C language compilers, gives the programmer direct control of the underlying hardware, for optimization.
