### 1.4 Perspective
---


&emsp;&emsp;This chapter described the first steps taken in an applied digital design project. In the next chapter we will build more complicated functionality using the gates built here. Although we have chosen to use Nand as our basic building block, other approaches are possible. For example, one can build a complete computer platform using Nor gates alone, or, alternatively, a combination of And, Or, and Not gates. These constructive approaches to logic design are theoretically equivalent, just as all theorems in geometry can be founded on different sets of axioms as alternative points of departure. The theory and practice of such constructions are covered in standard textbooks about digital design or logic design.

&emsp;&emsp;Throughout the chapter, we paid no attention to efficiency considerations such as the number of elementary gates used in constructing a composite gate or the number of wire crossovers implied by the design. Such considerations are critically important in practice, and a great deal of computer science and electrical engineering expertise focuses on optimizing them. Another issue we did not address at all is the physical implementation of gates and chips using the laws of physics, for example, the role of transistors embedded in silicon. There are of course several such implementation options, each having its own characteristics (speed, power requirements, production cost, etc.). Any nontrivial coverage of these issues requires some background in electronics and physics.
