### 9.4 Perspective
---


&emsp;&emsp;Jack is an “object-based” language, meaning that it supports objects and classes, but not inheritance. In this respect it is located somewhere between procedural languages like Pascal or C and object-oriented languages like Java or C++. Jack is certainly more “clunky” than any of these industrial-strength programming languages. However, its basic syntax and semantics are not very different from those of modern languages.

&emsp;&emsp;Some features of the Jack language leave much to be desired. For example, its primitive type system is, well, rather primitive. Moreover, it is a weakly typed language, meaning that type conformity in assignments and operations is not strictly enforced. Also, one may wonder why the Jack syntax includes keywords like do and let, why curly brackets must be used even in single statement blocks, and why the language does not enforce a formal operator priority.

&emsp;&emsp;Well, all these deviations from normal programming languages were introduced into Jack with one purpose: to allow the development of elegant and simple Jack compilers, as we will do in the next two chapters. For example, when parsing a statement (in any language), it is much easier to handle the code if the first token of the statement indicates which statement we’re in. That’s why the Jack syntax includes the do and let keywords, and so on. Thus, although Jack’s simplicity may be a nuisance when writing a Jack application, you will probably be quite grateful for it while writing the Jack compiler in the next two chapters.

&emsp;&emsp;Most modern languages are deployed with standard libraries, and so is Jack. As in Java and C#, this library can also be viewed as an interface to a simple and portable operating system. In the Jack-Hack platform, the services supplied by this OS are extremely minimal. They include no concurrency to support multi-threading or multi-processing, no file system to support permanent storage, and no communication. At the same time, the Jack OS provides some classical OS services like graphic and textual I/O (in very basic forms), standard implementation of strings, and standard memory allocation and de-allocation. Additionally, the Jack OS implements various mathematical functions, including multiplication and division, normally implemented in hardware. We return to these issues in chapter 12, where we will build this simple operating system as the last module in our computer system.
